# Chapter 9 : Application layer

**The application layer** includes all the protocols that allow the application to communicate with the user and the network. It includes protocols such as HTTP, FTP, SSH, etc.

**The presentation layer** is to present the data in a form that can be understood by the other host. It includes compression and encoding formats for video, audio, images, etc.

The purpose of **the session layer** is to maintain a dialogue between the source and remote applications.

The application layer is most often represented as a client-server system. In this system, the client requests information from the server which responds with one or more data streams.

The application layer can also use a peer-to-peer system allowing a decentralized exchange between hosts. This system is notably used in the gNutella or Bittorent protocol allowing file sharing.

The HTTP protocol allows to retrieve a Web page on the WorldWideWeb coded in HTML allowing each browser to interpret it. This protocol although effective is not very secure and the HTTPS protocol is set up to guarantee this security by the encryption of the flows.

Email messaging uses 3 protocols SMTP, IMAP and POP to send and receive emails.

The SMTP protocol allows you to send emails on port 25 by default. The SMTP server receives a well formatted email to send, it then tries to run. If it fails to connect to the destination server, it queues the message. If it finally fails to send it, it sends it back to the recipient as undeliverable.

A POP server waits on port 110 for a connection from the client. As soon as the connection is made, the messages are deleted and downloaded to the client. POP does not store messages as IMAP does. During a connection, the messages are copied and remain on the server. The user can also organize his messages according to a folder hierarchy.

> For DNS and DHCP, see the associated CERs

The FTP protocol allows the transfer of files, it uses two connections, one for flow control (port 21) and the other for sending files (20).